---
layout: post
title:  "What is Learning?"
date:   2022-01-27 18:20:49 +0100
categories: programming knowledge
---
How do we learn? The question may sound abstract, but I believe that all our educational institutions hold a distinct idea of what constitutes learning, no matter how hidden it might be.

<!--end_of_excerpt-->
A great example is the Italian university system, which many of my friends are enrolled in. In Italy, most semester-long courses have a straightforward structure. In the first half, students attend long lectures where they passively listen while taking copious notes, and only interact with their professor to ask clarificatory questions. In the second half, they review their notes and study one or more related textbooks for a final exam. Notably, the final exam often determines 100% of the course's final grade, and is usually multiple-question, testing students' retention. 

Of course, I'm overgeneralizing a little bit. Some friends in engineering and architecture have had more project-oriented academic assessments. Others in medicine and nursing have held mandatory internships in their local hospitals, training practical skills. But, in general, what constitutes learning in Italian universities is absorption of information, from lectures, notes, and textbooks that are imposed on students, and the mark of success is memory recall.

This pedagogical structure is very different to the Recurse Center's, which I'm enrolled in currently. There are no classes and instructors, and while many participants decide to organize meetings or talks, all attendents are free to contribute within the bounds of civility, not just of clarification. No one is encouraged to spend time reading textbooks, but everyone is encouraged to socialize, share their learning, and contribute actively to the learning environment (though not even that is mandatory). The closest thing to a "test" is not a multiple-question exam, but an optional presentation that everyone attends on Friday afternoons where presenters show off their work. What constitutes learning is generally up to the individual participant, but most often involves time spent on a project and hard coding skills rather than recall.

I highlight these differences to point out two profoundly different conceptions of learning underlying these educational institutions. For the Italian university, students learn when passively absorbing information from an authoritative source and demonstrating effective recall. For the Recurse Center, participants learn when they choose their own curriculum and have positive, stimulating interactions with their peers. I'm not interested in arguing that one place is better for learning than the other. I am just fascinated by the pedagogical ideoligies that underlie these seemingly unopinionated institutions. 

It's especially interesting when considering much simpler and more widespread educational institutions, such as the non-fiction book. In an excellent essay, [Why Books Don't Work](https://andymatuschak.org/books/), Andy Matuschak makes the case that books are just as opinionated as the Recurse Center or Italian university. Books, he points out, implicitly rely on a model of transmission-based learning, where the reader passively absorbs information contained in the text. As the title suggests, he argues that this doesn't work - Matuschak embarrassingly admits that he rarely reads a book and absorbs what amounts to more than a few sentences. Even worse, he recognizes that it's not until forced introspection that he realizes just how little he understood in the first place. 

This lack of understanding from non-fiction books is, I feel, quite a taboo. Matuschak notes the embarrassment of his friends when they admit to the same, but the reactions I've observed in my own life are quite different. Once they've read a non-fiction book, most readers I've met are quite confident about their grasp of the text's contents. When challenged over a key idea that they might not remember, readers either claim that they did remember, but it wasn't off the top of their head, or just shift the focus to something they do remember. And they deny that they might have read a book without understanding its contents, at least outwardly.

The denial is understandable. Books, as Matuschak notes, are time-consuming mediums, requiring hours of careful reading. After putting in so much effort, the last thing someone wants to hear, or admit, is that those many hours amounted to very little. But we trust the underlying transmission-based model of learning more than our own lack of understanding - as a result, far from disproving the model, admitting poor learning is equivalent to admitting stupidity. And nobody wants that.

It's quite a pessimistic view of non-fiction books, and I don't entirely agree with it on a number of levels. In the first place, I'm skeptical that it's the best explanation for reader's poor retention of information after claiming to have read a book. A much simpler explanation is that readers lie about reading the book in the first place. It's a cynical hypothesis, but it can explain poor understanding, and it is testable. Hence in the last chapter of [Everybody Lies](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Seth_Stephens-Davidowitz#Everybody_Lies), data scientist Seth Stephens-Davidowitz suggests that based on his analysis of Amazon book quotes, only about 7% of readers get to the end of [Thinking, Fast and Slow](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Thinking,_Fast_and_Slow), which Matuschak mentions numerous times. While this hypothesis doesn't disprove Matuschak's point, it might warrant a less pessimistic view of books' educational potential.

More fundamentally, I believe that information absorption is not the be-all-end-all of non-fiction. Books are a great resource to bounce ideas off of brilliant minds with unique expertise across time and space. In fact, as an avid non-fiction reader myself, I only often select books that I know I might disagree with. Some of my favorite books have, rather than informed me, challenged me and clashed with my view of the world, sparking engaging reading experiences that felt more akin to discussions than lectures. This dialogue warrants 

Books are also a great reference for knowledge. They provide an amazingly researched reference for hypotheses, statements, and paradigms that explicitly map to other texts. Of course, this is only possible with modern publishing institutions, which assure quality and faithfulness, and modern academic institutions, which spur much of the research and debate that inspire many of today's best non-fiction books.

Ultimately, though, I mostly agree with Matuschak. After realizing how shockingly little I remember of some of my favorite books, despite my best efforts, I also think that books are ineffective pedagogical tools for long-term learning. Recently, I've also started sharing his fascination for spaced-repetition. For the past few weeks, I've been using the flash-card app [Anki](https://apps.ankiweb.net/), and I've already seen noticeable improvements in my ability to use the command line, which involves quite a bit of memorization. A few days ago, I started reading a textbook, [Designing Data-Intensive Applications](https://www.amazon.com/Designing-Data-Intensive-Applications-Reliable-Maintainable-ebook/dp/B06XPJML5D/?pldnSite=1), and I've challenged myself to not take notes, either on the margins or in a separate notebook, and only use Anki to record key ideas and then rehearse them. I'll write a follow-up blog post describing my experience.